Rails 6 Quickstarts (#9603)
auth0/docs: articles/quickstart/webapp/rails/01-login.md

  - rails
contentType: tutorial
useCase: quickstart
---

<%= include('../_includes/_getting_started', { library: 'Rails', callback: 'http://localhost:3000/auth/auth0/callback' }) %>

<%= include('../../../_includes/_logout_url', { returnTo: 'http://localhost:3000' }) %>

## Integrate Auth0

### Install the Dependencies

This tutorial uses `omniauth-auth0`, a custom [OmniAuth strategy](https://github.com/intridea/omniauth#omniauth-standardized-multi-provider-authentication), to handle the authentication flow.  Add the following dependencies to your `Gemfile`:

```ruby
gem 'omniauth-auth0', '~> 2.5'
gem 'omniauth-rails_csrf_protection', '~> 0.1' # prevents forged authentication requests
```

Once your gems are added, install the gems with `$ bundle install`:

### Initialize OmniAuth Auth0

Create an Auth0 config file in the root of your project's directory `./config/auth0.yml` .

```yaml
# ./config/auth0.yml
development:
  auth0_domain: ${account.namespace}
  auth0_client_id: ${account.clientId}
  auth0_client_secret: <YOUR AUTH0 CLIENT SECRET>
```

> Create an initializer file in the root of your project's dierctory `./config/initializers/auth0.rb` and [configure](https://github.com/auth0/omniauth-auth0#additional-authentication-parameters) the **OmniAuth** middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an initializer file in the root of your project's directory `./config/initializers/auth0.rb` and [configure](https://github.com/auth0/omniauth-auth0#additional-authentication-parameters) the **OmniAuth** middleware.
```

It is a bit confusing that it mentions to create a file in the root of your project, yet it mentions a path containing two sub folders.

```ruby
# ./config/initializers/auth0.rb
Rails.application.config.auth0 = Rails.application.config_for(:auth0)

Rails.application.config.middleware.use OmniAuth::Builder do
  auth0_config = Rails.application.config_for(:auth0)
  provider(
    :auth0,
    Rails.application.config.auth0['auth0_client_id'],
    Rails.application.config.auth0['auth0_client_secret'],

>     Rails.application.config.auth0['auth0_domain'],

Reviewer: Pardon my ignorance on ruby, but is there any reason why `auth0_config = Rails.application.config_for(:auth0)` is not being used (line 50)?

Reviewer 2: I had this comment too, feels like we can save some typing and reduce a bit of code.

    callback_path: '/auth/auth0/callback',
    authorize_params: {
      scope: 'openid profile'
    }
  )
end
```

### Add an Auth0 controller

> Create an Auth0 controller file in the root of your project's dierctory `./config/controllers/auth0_controller.rb` for handling of the authentication callback.  Inside of the callback method assign the hash of user information returned `request.env['omniauth.auth']` to the active session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an Auth0 controller file in the root of your project's directory `./config/controllers/auth0_controller.rb` for handling of the authentication callback.  Inside of the callback method assign the hash of user information, returned as `request.env['omniauth.auth']`, to the active session.
```

Same here, it mentions root directory yet places a file two sub-levels deep.

> Create an Auth0 controller file in the root of your project's dierctory `./config/controllers/auth0_controller.rb` for handling of the authentication callback.  Inside of the callback method assign the hash of user information returned `request.env['omniauth.auth']` to the active session.

Reviewer 2: Feels like an opportunity here to include a Rails `generate` command that the reader can copy & paste to create this controller.

```
rails generate controller auth0 callback failure --no-assets --no-helper
```

WDTY? We do this later for Logout, for example.

```ruby
# ./app/controllers/auth0_controller.rb
class Auth0Controller < ApplicationController
  def callback
    # This stores all the user information that came from Auth0 and the IdP
    session[:userinfo] = request.env['omniauth.auth']

    # Redirect to the URL you want after successful auth
    redirect_to '/dashboard'
  end

  def failure
    # Handles failed authentication -- Show a failure page (you can also handle with a redirect)
    @error_msg = request.params['message']
  end
end
```

Add the following routes to your `./config/routes.rb` file:

```ruby
# ./config/routes.rb
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get '/auth/auth0/callback' => 'auth0#callback'
  get '/auth/failure' => 'auth0#failure'
end
```

## Login
A user can now log into your application by visiting the `/auth/auth0` endpoint.

::: warning
To prevent forged authentication requests, use the link_to or button_to helper methods using the `:post` method
:::

```ruby
  # Place the login button anywhere
  ${"<%= button_to 'Login', 'auth/auth0', method: :post %>"}
```

### Redirect User to Login

> In order for us to redirect the user to login without any user interaction, we will need to create a non-interactive redirect page.  The redirect page will [prevent forged authentication requests](https://github.com/cookpad/omniauth-rails_csrf_protection) and handle the `:POST` request for us automatically using javascript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order for us to redirect the user to login without any user interaction, we will need to create a non-interactive redirect page. The redirect page will [prevent forged authentication requests](https://github.com/cookpad/omniauth-rails_csrf_protection) and handle the `:POST` request for us automatically using javascript.
```

> In order for us to redirect the user to login without any user interaction, we will need to create a non-interactive redirect page.  The redirect page will [prevent forged authentication requests](https://github.com/cookpad/omniauth-rails_csrf_protection) and handle the `:POST` request for us automatically using javascript.

Reviewer 2: What's missing from here for me is the reasoning behind _why_ a user might want to do this. We could include a sentence, something like "As an example, you might want to do this when..." just to give an example scenario when this might be useful.

Right now without it, it's a little abstract.

Reviewer 2: Also in general it's a good approach, but the only annoyance I found was that if a user decides to back out of the login page back to their app, they'll hit the redirect page which then automatically forwards them to the login page again. They have to do that thing where they click back twice to get to the right page.

Author: @stevehobbsdev if they were to back out of the login page to a protected route, wouldnt they be redirected back to login traditionally?

Author: I think we will move this out of the quickstart and into an example

```erb
<!-- ./app/views/auth0/redirect.html.erb -->
<div class="redirecting">Redirecting...</div>
${"<%= button_to 'Login', '/auth/auth0', method: :post,  style: 'display:none;', id: 'redirect' %>"}
<script>document.getElementById('redirect').form.submit()</script>
<noscript><style type="text/css"> #redirect { display:block !important; } .redirecting { display: none; }</style></noscript>
```

Add the following routes to your `./config/routes.rb` file:
```ruby
  # ./config/routes.rb
  # ..
  get '/auth/redirect' => 'auth0#redirect'
```

## Display User Profile

> To display the user's profile, your application should provide a protected route.  You can use a controller `concern` to control access to routes.  Create the following file `./app/controllers/concerns/secured.rb`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display the user's profile, your application should provide a protected route. You can use a controller `concern` to control access to routes. Create the following file `./app/controllers/concerns/secured.rb`
```

  end

  def logged_in_using_omniauth?
    # redirect user to the non-interactive redirect page
    redirect_to '/auth/redirect/' unless session[:userinfo].present?
  end
end
```

> After you have created the secured controller concern, include it in any controllers requires a logged in user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you have created the secured controller concern, include it in any controller that requires a logged in user.
```

```ruby
# ./app/controllers/dashboard_controller.rb
class DashboardController < ApplicationController
  include Secured

  def show
    # session[:userinfo] was saved earlier on Auth0Controller#callback
    @user = session[:userinfo]
  end
end
```

> Here is an example of displaying that information on the page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of displaying the corresponding user's information
```

module LogoutHelper
  def logout_url
    domain = Rails.application.config.auth0.auth0_domain

>     client_id = Rails.application.config.auth0.auth0_client_id

Reviewer: Above, the following syntax was used `Rails.application.config.auth0['auth0_client_id'],`, should we stick to one syntax or is there any reason these use a different way to access the properties?

Reviewer 2: I think we should use `auth0_config = Rails.application.config_for(:auth0)` here again and index into that instead of `Rails.application.config.auth0`
